3. TEST CASE PURIFICATION
In this section, we propose the concept of spectrum driven
test case purification (test case purification for short) for
fault localization. We first present the framework in Section
3.1. Then we show the details of the three main phases in
Sections 3.2, 3.3, and 3.4, respectively. Finally, we discuss
the extensibility of test case purification in Section 3.5.
3.1 Framework
The main goal of test case purification is to generate purified
test cases from each failing test case. A purified test case is
a short test case with only one assertion and is generated
by removing several statements from the original failing test
case. We employ such purified test cases to improve existing
techniques on fault localization.
Figure 2 illustrates the framework of test case purification
for fault localization. This framework consists of three ma-
jor phases: test case atomization, test case slicing, and rank
refinement. Given a specific technique on fault localization,
the input of test case purification is a subject program with
its test suite and the final output is a ranking of statements.
Both the input and the output are the same as those in typi-
cal fault localization techniques, e.g., Tarantula and Ochiai.
In test case atomization, each original failing test case
with k assertions is replaced by k single-assertion test cases.
A single-assertion test case is a copy of the original test
case, but only one out of k original assertions is kept. In
test case slicing, each single-assertion test case is treated
as a program. We use dynamic slicing technique to remove
irrelevant statements in each single-assertion test case. Then
short test cases are generated as purified test cases. In rank
refinement, we re-rank the statements in an existing fault
localization technique based on the spectra of all the purified
test cases.
In our work, test case purification for fault localization is
run automatically. We describe the implementation details
in Section 4.3.
3.2 Test Case Atomization
The goal of test case atomization is to generate a set of test
cases for each failing test case. As the term atomization
suggests, we consider each assertion has an atomic part in
a test case. Given a failing test case with k assertions, we
create k copies for this test case and we transform k − 1
assertions into regular test case statements for each copy (no
exception from the assertion reaches the testing framework if
the assertion fails). To transform an assertion into a regular
test case statement, we surround this assertion with a try-
catch structure shown in Figure 3.
In Java, the class java.lang.Throwable is a superclass of all
the exceptions. As mentioned in Section 2.1, an exception
will be thrown to the test case if an assertion is not satisfied.
Based on the above structure, the exception will be caught as
throwable and the test case will not be interrupted1. Based
on the surrounding structure in Figure 3, a set of k single-
assertion test cases are created to replace each originally
failing test case. A failing test case with only one assertion
will be kept without handling.
Note that in JUnit, two kinds of interruptions will stop the
execution of a test case, namely a failure and an error. A fail-
ure is caused by an unsatisfied assertion, which is designed
by developers; an error is caused by a fault, which is not
considered by developers [10]. Thus, an error may appear
in any statement of a test case. In test case atomization, we
only deal with the failures (in assertions) in JUnit. If an er-
ror appears, the execution of a single-assertion test case will
be aborted because an error usually causes severe problems,
which are beyond the expected test cases by developers.
After generating single-assertion test cases, we compile and
execute all the single-assertion test cases. Meanwhile, we
collect the failing ones among these test cases; for each fail-
ing single-assertion test case, we record its position that
aborts the execution. This position is referred as a broken
statement. For example, a broken statement in a single-
assertion test case could be an assertion (i.e., the exact as-
sertion left in the test case) or a statement that throws an
unexpected error. Finally, each failing single-assertion test
case as well as its broken position is collected.
3.3 Test Case Slicing
The goal of test case slicing is to generate purified test
cases before collecting their spectra. Given a failing single-
assertion test case resulting from test case atomization, we
slice this test case by removing irrelevant statements.
Program slicing can be mainly divided into two categories:
static slicing [5] and dynamic slicing [38]. Informally, static
slicing keeps all the possible statements based on static data
and control dependencies while dynamic slicing keeps the ac-
tually executed statements in the dynamic execution (with
dynamic data and control dependencies). In test case slicing,
we use a dynamic slicing technique to remove statements in
test cases since dynamic slicing may lead to more removal
of statements [38]. In dynamic slicing, a slicing criterion
should be specified before execution the program. A slicing
criterion is defined as a pair < b, V >, where b is a state-
ment in the object program and V is a set of variables to be
observed at b.
We perform dynamic slicing and slice single-assertion test
cases during its execution by the Junit framework. Our
slicing criterion for a test case is its broken assertion with
all the variables at this statement. Then we execute the
dynamic slicing technique to collect the statements that will
be removed. After the slicing, each failing single-assertion
test case in test case atomization is updated with a purified
test case. Then we execute these purified test cases on the
project program and record the spectra for next phase.
3.4 Rank Refinement
The goal of rank refinement is to re-rank the statements by
an existing fault localization technique with the spectra in
the phase of test case slicing.
In all the purified test cases, we keep only one test case
if two or more than test cases have the same spectrum. As
mentioned in Section 3.3, all the purified test cases are failing
test cases. Let S be a set of candidate statements. We
define the ratio of a statement s ∈ S. First, for a statement
s ∈ S that is covered during the execution of all the purified
test cases, ratio(s) = βef (s)
βef (s)+βnf (s) , where βef (s) and βnf (s)
are the numbers of test cases covering and non-covering s.
Second, for a statement s that is not covered by any purified
test case, we directly set ratio(s) = 0.
The output of an existing fault localization technique, such
Tarantula or Ochiai, is the suspiciousness values for all the
candidate statements. Let susp(s) be the suspiciousness
value of a statement s ∈ S in a fault localization technique.
Then we normalize the susp(s) as 0 to 1 for all the state-
ments in S. The normalized suspiciousness value is defined
as norm(s) = susp(s)−min(S)
max(S)−min(S) , where min(S) and max(S)
denote the minimum score and the maximum score for all
the statements in S, respectively.
For each statement s ∈ S, both ratio(s) and norm(s) is
between 0 and 1 (both inclusive). Then we refine the ranking
of each statement s by combining ratio(s) and norm(s). The
final score of s is defined as score(s) = norm(s) × 1+ratio(s)
2 .
Then for all the statements s ∈ S, the final score score(s) is
between 0 and 1 (both inclusive). Based on the final scores
of all the statements, we re-rank the statements as the result
of fault localization by test case purification.
3.5 Discussion
Basic fault localization technique. Test case purifica-
tion modifies the existing test cases. Consequently, the spec-
tra are changed and the suspicious statements according to
a fault localization technique (e.g., Tarantula) are re-ranked.
Many other fault localization techniques can be used instead,
such as Ochiai, Jaccard, and SBI. We examine the results
for six fault localization techniques in Section 5.
Method of rank refinement. We define the new score of
each statement s as score(s). This definition can be replaced
by other formulae, for example, the average of norm(s) and
ratio(s), i.e., norm(s)+ratio(s)
2 , or the geometric mean, i.e.,
2×norm(s)×ratio(s)
norm(s)+ratio(s) . Results of such refinement methods can
be further explored.